We really bring up this Four Training of the Mind. Four Training of the Mind, all four renunci
ations,
and this is the essence teaching of the Buddha's first teaching, "Suffering Truth and the Cause of
Suffering Truth."
That's what it is, the essence of that, in practical ways. Put that, practically by the greatest
masters.
These four renunciations, we discussed this study. They don't say, "What means renouncing?"
"Renouncing," that's what translated in the English at many times, and it is called "Lodoknambaje,"
that will reverse our grasping, clinging, clinging. When we reflect on these four renunciations,
the thought of this training of the mind, it will reverse that this grasping, clinging to the sams
ara.
Grasping, clinging, that kind of like holding, it really will reverse. That's what's called "Lodokn
ambaje."
In the Tibetan, we use the word that "Lodoknambaje," "Lodoknambaje." "Lodoknambaje" means "mind." "
Lodoknambaje" means "reverse."
"Nambaje" means four kinds of that reverse our grasping mind from the samsara, and which does lead
into any, I think,
poorly known session thought. Also, sometimes, it's named for training of the mind, although "Lodok
nambaje,"
it will train our mind. That means it will bring our mind more gentle and peaceful, more practical.
First in time, we're not looking to that. Our duality mind let to ignore the reality level of the
way things are.
Our duality mind looks like opposite. Let's look opposite and ignore the reality. Fact. Fact, let
me ignore.
Always looking outside, ignore that. We'll look to close to this issue or this nature of the
phenomena,
it will make our heart more subtle, more gentle, more practical, and more graceful, more graceful,
more richness, more precious.
It will become all that beauty. It will come like that arrow dance, that hovering attitude, thought
, looking to the other side.
It really will stop. For those reasons, those greatest masters named as for training of the mind.
We need trains. Think that. And also, many times, you will say, it's named as in the way that these
four are named,
named "Shenloknambaje." "Shenloknambaje." "Shenloknambaje." "Shenlomi" ain't well, well, kind of,
you, you, well,
you, it will make you not so excited with some sounds. Four-kind is not so excited, not so excited,
not so kind of endlessly obsessed with that.
We think that. This. So what it does, it will bring us to home. It will, mind, our mind will bring
to home.
We feel more richness, more appreciation. For example, thinking of the precious human body, what we
discussed yesterday.
You know that. It's you all know. It's not something that you don't know. I'm talking. I heard. You
heard. We all heard this.
But practice is what we need to do. Practice means what the great master Malaripa said in his
teachings to the students.
We're not too much, kind of, trust your confidence on this portraying of a mind. All Buddha said
those, all teachings said that,
all I read, this and that, kind of, like, loosely, kind of, very casual and unimportant. He just
said, kind of, like, casual thoughts.
That's what really many times we do. Not just only we do, but in the, according to teaching, 18
times those
practitioners did too. You cannot ignore that. But this is really very important, looking into the
fact.
And when we look to the thing of the precious human body, as we discussed, what it will bring. It
will bring what it grateful.
Grateful, graceful, thankful, joyful. How precious it is, how important it is. I don't like to
waste this precious moment,
precious lives, this precious opportunities. Really, all the very practical issues are coming.
It didn't mean that we had to give every some sort of things. It didn't mean that. Read, for
example, that
life story of the great master, Master Lumkimas. All great master, Nimminamas. He is the house
holder, Nimminamas.
He is only the new religious. He is only the jin go mchhe ji, even in our lifetimes. There is a
householder.
And then, as well as the great master, Mardas. And this, we didn't mean that we had to give up that
.
But we're not just, kind of, obsessed and not appreciating, not reparating, not using these
opportunities in progress. That is known as the tricks and the deception of the ego-claimers.
And then, also, next one, I will talk really about this, among the foreign organizations,
about this lord of namma jai. It's impermanent. When you have the understanding of impermanent,
again, we will be more appreciators. We use time wisely, opportunities of wisely.
And our gathering is precious. And your family's friend is precious. And our family and friend are
precious. They're not going to be here forever, nor I am. But where we are gathering for the moment
at times, we truly enjoy the lives. Celebrate. In a way, it is time to celebrate. Celebrating
and fulfilling. Appreciating to each other. Echoing knowledge to each other. Respect to each other.
And purging to each other. And apologies to each other. All that is known as dhamma.
And also, in the human world, those are known as good conduct.
As great master, Nagaruduna said, we have good conduct of the human beings,
human hope, what he said. Heaven is not power. Of course, in Buddhism, heaven made those God's
rams. It means God's ram. So, God, we have the good conduct of the human beings. The God's rams,
the shita heavens, and so forth. All those God's rams are not power. When you're standing tall
and firm on the good conduct of the human rams and God's rams, then what Nagaruduna said? Narayana
is not power. I said that yesterday and many times. Great Master Kenji in the Buddha said many
times.
It's true. Really, that is what we need. So therefore, the impermanent, when we start
thinking, it's true. It's not just making up things. It's not just Buddhist phenomena or those
who follow the Buddha teaching. It's not that phenomena. Not phenomena. It's everyone's
phenomena. Everyone in this universe or a core of Buddha teaching holds three rams.
Impermanent is phenomena of all three rams. That's where things are. Everything.
All impermanent. And that is what the teaching says in the Buddha's teaching. There's three imper
manents.
Subtle impermanent and gross impermanent. Gross impermanent, what we notice,
ourself, because our duality mind is very gross. It's not really just a subtle. It's always gross
and looking for that. That's what we see. But that gross impermanent is not just happened by that
moment. It continually accumulated and continually developed. Continually changed. And that is
known
as subtle impermanent. Subtle impermanent is the moving as first as instant. As our second,
or when we look into the clock. The instant impermanent is the moving or changing as our
the clocks. All our times. That's how it is. But no matter whatever it is, even if this is a big
change, there's a lot of bright beautiful things. All can happen. Also again in the teaching said
the great master Buddha Chakra Manoa, great teacher said because of impermanent we can make
improvement. We can make a change. We can make change. And we use these opportunities. We can
change that direction of the impermanent meant to the good purpose, good use, good be possible
for all the beings. That's what you see. So that understanding and what the great master in the
teaching practice lately said. Think of the impermanent. All this universe is impermanent.
The universe, the world where we are looks at it so tall and so concretely. It is impermanent.
It is also not out of that subtle impermanent. It's constantly shifting and changing. And it will
come to the end. What in the Buddhism called end of the eons. It will break that. So this universe
is
impermanent. That's it. Then we take all living beings inside this universe or in this universe,
this living beings, also impermanent, impermanent. And then in the Pacific we take all those great
leaders, the most powerful man on earth. Earth, those great leaders, even we heard names,
kind of can scare those individuals also impermanent. They came and they're gone.
And they know not just only that, but all those holy beings, noble beings,
all those great beings according to Buddhism, Buddha Shakyamunas, 500 arabas, 80 Mahasiddhas
and as well as all those great scholars, great masters, masters, Naropa, Telopas and all those
great masters. Also Naropa. And then in the Duretha Phongs, I mean in the Buddhist history,
all those 25 disciples. I mean everyone, they are affording the teaching and they have the
capability of shifting and changing the four elements. They can transform and change the four
elements. Fire, they can turn in water. Water, they can turn on the wind. Wind, they can turn in
the
earth. They have to completely control the four elements or the five elements. They cannot be
destroyed by the fire, water, wind, earth. Anyways, but still they are on our bone and left on our
sides. And then also in Christians or other religions, such those great beings, such as Jesus
Christ,
all those great beings, same thing, things. So this is how everything is in these changing
situations,
changing. And then our own memories, for example, thinking of the immersivity,
how many things have changed? Since in our memories, even our look into our physicals,
how many things have changed? Time we are babies and until now, how many things have changed? How
many things have changed in our environment, our experience, our understanding, idea, philosophy,
all those, each time they're so solid, so true, so kind of stable and this and that. All this
here, change, we look back to all that. And so everything is really like that. I mean, all this,
this is known as impermanent, impermanent. But reflected in mind, thought to that, what it makes,
makes ourselves more practical, more peaceful, more grateful. Where we are all together,
when everything is in our head, when everything is in our control. How wonderful, how beautiful,
how spectacular it is. Our life is also a fright. I mean, because of that, all is a fright. It has
what the great master said, Arya Deva, who is one of the famous masters in the Indian of Buddhist
historians and the foremost disciples of the Narayana, he said, this life has more obstacles
than the supporters. If there is pure supporters than the obstacles, even the poor supporters
can become obstacles. Even poor supporters to our life can become obstacles.
Even that situation, still our life is continually shining. How wonderful, how beautiful, how
graceful. And for that reason, again, Narayana himself said in a teaching, teaching as I just
letter to his friend, the letter to his friend, this life has like, it's like surrounded by life,
life of life. I said, no, no, no. This life is like butter life. Our life is like butter life.
It's life is so many heaviness that we are, this life of butter life is completely surrounded by
wind, trouble is wind, trouble is wind. And wind looks like how it is, but still we are breathing,
we have time to sleep, to wake up, all that even is surrounded by all that, that situation.
Still this life is shining. How wonderful, how beautiful it is. That's what really Narayana said.
This is not what Narayana said and Aryadeva said. It's true. They're talking true. They highlight
things where things are. Our duality mind don't hope, don't see that. We ignore that. We've many
times, we've asked times. Something that we can maybe do. Many people in our life, if we look back,
many times with a lot of things, of course, we use so wonderfully beautiful our life, many things.
But if we look sometimes, some of those lives, what we did, wasted in the way, really wasted.
There's no benefits to me, to the others. Maybe somebody need to become the disturbance to me
and to the others or to ourselves, to the others. So reflecting of the empowerment,
always in the teachings it will make it calm, peaceful, practical, and it also will bring more
joyful effort, more courage, more commitment. And for that reason, Buddha Shakyamuni said,
in the teaching, he said, among all the conceptual thought, thought, the thinking of the imperman
ence
is supreme. Among all the conceptual rhythms, thinking of the impermanence, reflecting the
impermanence is consumption. But this conception is supreme, that's what Buddha said. And it's
put also, put also that, among all the footprints, the elephant print, foot print is supreme of the
being. Thinking of this impermanence, it is so special. We are also reflecting to the nature.
When we think of this, when we think of the precious life as it in doing it, precious human body,
and then when we think also impermanence, it really makes ourselves more calm and more peaceful,
more graceful. We will use this, our life, something more better and beautiful. For those reasons,
and the great master in the teaching said, his foreknowledge of thought is, foreknowledge of
thought or this foretraining of the mind is head, head of the practices. He said, we have that is,
and we have that foreknowledge of thought, then we have the head, will do better, all the last
things.
So is it? In the way we have head. And for that reason, many times in the teaching, he said,
always reflect this foreknowledge of thought. Bring more joy, every session in the teaching said,
every session. If we have this foreknowledge of thought, it makes our calm, more peaceful,
more stable. At the same time, when you have this attitude or reflecting of this mind, how practice
will go more, more efficient, most beautifully. And we have that thought that ending, at the end of
the session, it will make more calm, peaceful, and a dedication that all can practice completely so
beautiful. That's what the early teaching said. So that is what even we practice of the Zochen,
we should always have those thoughts. This is looking to our own really where things are
and reflecting where things are. It's not just ignoring that. So with those thoughts,
with this thought, and then you will start with those thoughts. And again, I will go with it.